>> Spencer Schneidenbach: So let's
talk a little bit more about methods.
Methods are basically ways of
doing reusable things, right?
There are ways of encapsulating logic such
that you can say that this thing does x,
it computes this value,
it modifies this point in memory.
So a method is really about doing.
And the first method that we looked at,
of course,
is our main method here, which is
the entry point into the application.
It's kind of the standard way that you
get into.net is using the main method,
but a class we can declare other
methods besides main Of course.
There are many different there's
many different places and
ways that you can declare a method and
they're all kind of,
they all follow this very kind of same
pattern or structure as you will.
They're typically gonna
have an access modifier.
They may have a, another modifier
depending on what kind of method it is.
We'll just,
we'll get to that as we dive further in.
It will have a return type and
it will have the name
of the method followed by any
parameters that the method has.
So one of the things we talked to that I
mentioned that C-sharp has a particular
way of styling things.
A C# style for
methods is to declare them as pascal case.
Which is means that a capital letter which
is different from a lot of other languages
which usually do camel case,
where the first letter is lowercase.
And C# will tell you, hey, this is the
preferred style if you did type it as and
declare it as a method as something named
in a way that Microsoft doesn't tell you.
And I tend to actually exclusively
stick to Microsoft styling roles,
because that's what most
other developers expect.
I mentioned there are access modifiers, so
you'd be able to say, for
instance, that a public method
on this program class would
be exposed to other members.
And other classes and other pieces
of code, even outside this library.
For the purposes we're gonna
keep most things public,
just to kind of we'll just for
clarity sake.
But as we get into inheritance and
we talk really about like class and
object-oriented programming a little more,
we will definitely talk about these
because these are definitely important.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: So,
let's copy paste this very simple,
very contrived method.
Of course,
we have this built into the language, but
as far as demonstrating all
of the different parts of
the language you're concerned, I think
an example like this kind of does it well.
You have your access modifier here.
It is optional.
If you don't, if you exclude it,
it's private and
only accessible by the program class.
You have the return type, which in this
case is int because all we're doing is
taking these and
adding these two numbers together.
We have the name of the method,
which again is pascal case,
and then we have
the variable declarations.
So some things to note about
kind of how a method name and
a method is unique is made unique.
If you try to copy paste this method, it's
gonna throw a compiler error at you and
say, this is already defined
with the same parameter types.
A method is defined by what's called its
signature, and its signature is its name,
followed by what parameters it takes in.
So if we were to add, for
instance, int c here, and
modify even without modifying this method,
the compiler stops complaining at us and
says, okay, that's a valid method.
This is what's called method overloading.
So you can have a method with multiple
ways of calling it, multiple signatures,
and they could do different things,
have different behaviors,
depending on what's
passed into the method.
So say for instance,
we wanted to add a 1, int b =2.
When we call add numbers, and
actually we're gonna
declare these as static.
This main method can't use AddNumbers
unless they're all declared a static in
this case, which we'll get into
a little bit more a little later.
And then we will say AddNumbers.
And you can say that as we have the IDE
will happily tell us that there's two
different ways you can call this.
So you can call it here or
you can call it here.
So we'll show you the method signatures.
And this is one of the things I
love about.net is their investment
in the tooling and it really makes APIs
discoverable, makes it very easy to use.
It's also helpful that Microsoft really,
really is stringent and about documenting
the behaviors of these methods, which is
really cool at all, which is really cool.
So like declaring a variable,
we can set the value of this return
type because this is an int.
We can set this to a int,
call it C equals.
And then we can say that
Console.WriteLine, we can say write C.
And we're good to go dent that and
if we run it,
you'll see that it will not run.
You will see that it indeed done that run.
You'll see that it does print
the three as we expect.
So let's see,
what else have we got for methods?
A couple of different ways
of declaring parameters,
which are useful to know for now.
You can assign default values
to parameters, so for instance,
if you wanted to have a parameter
automatically be assigned to 5 why
you would do that in this particular case.
I'm probably not gonna
write code like this but
if you wanted to default value on this
parameter, you can absolutely do that.
It's typically gonna be a value parameter.
A value parameter is gonna
be allow you to do this,
strings will allow you to do this.
But if you have something that's like
a instance of a class, a reference type,
it's typically not gonna allow you to
just assign it to a random instance.
It's not gonna allow that, but
you can assign default values, and
I do wanna kind of point
out what that looks like.
If you call it, you can actually call
add numbers then with just one argument.
And if you hover over, you can see that
it knows that it's calling int a b5, but
it'll show you, hey, we didn't have
to pass in the second argument.
If you try to move this over here,
compiler will give you an error saying
default values, the optional parameters
must appear after the required parameters.
So a little bit of a restriction there.
As well as you can choose if you
want to take in a series of parameters.
So in this case, you can tell it,
you can take in any number of integers.
So we could say add numbers one, and
you can see, when we hover over it,
it's calling the correct one.
But we can add 2,3, 4, we can have all.
We can pretty much with this params and
followed by an array.
This is how you declare an array,
which we'll talk about in a little bit.
This allows you to have
a variable number of parameters.
Params, you can have other
parameters in front, for
instance, but
the params declared must come at the end.
Yes, Mark?
>> Mark: Does every method have
to be inside of a class or
can you have a generic method
that is kind of global?
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Not quite most
the time you're gonna declare methods
inside of classes, but you can declare
what's called a local function.
This is a relatively new feature,
and I do use it quite a bit,
which is that you can declare a function
now inside of a block of code.
So you could have your add numbers here,
and
then have int a, int b- and
then return zero.
You can declare them in line
inside of the block of code.
So that's the thing that you can do.
Most of the time, I'm declaring
them in the context of a class.
Really good question.
>> Student 1: I feel like I'm not quite
understanding the purpose of params so
that's for like an optional.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Purpose of
params is really to give youu a 0 to n or
any really any upper bound number
of parameters that you can
call add numbers and then not call it with
any entity with any arguments at all.
It's just basically asking for
a list of integers.
You can give it 1, and
here it's still just gonna give you.
It's gonna be an array this,
when it's called,
this is gonna be an array of one integer.
And then when you do 2 and 3, it will be
an array, which is a set of data, right?
Of three integers in that case.
So params just allows you to kind
of have an infinite number of
parameters as it were.
So good question.
>> Student 1: But it needs to come at
the end because then they're optional.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Yeah, well, it
needs to come at the end very similar to
optional parameters because you could
call any number of params here,
but if you try to declare it with
like a string name at the end.
It's gonna complain and say a params
parameter must be the last parameter.
So it's a compiler rule, right?
It's to kind of protect you from shooting
yourself in the foot as they say.
Good question.
So we've talked about
value returning methods,
which are things that return a value, but
sometimes methods just do things, right?
Sometimes they just process or
maybe they'll print some data.
So there are what I like to call, and
I don't know that there's common parlance
around this, but a avoid returning method.
I'll talk about why I call
it that here shortly but
essentially, a method with
a void type as its return type,
which basically essentially says,
I don't return anything.
I just do something, right?
So this isn't something that you
can get a value out of, right?
So if you go up here and you say and you
declare var message, equals print message.
It's gonna complain at you and
say that you can't assign void
to an implicitly typed variable.
You can't assign void at all.
So this essentially just is a method that
does not have a return value, right?
It just does stuff which are extremely
useful for lots of reasons.
Most of the time, I'm declaring some
kind of value, returning function and
then my void returning function is gonna
be doing some kind of processing of all of
those different other functions.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: They otherwise
share the same properties as functions
that return a value.
They have modifiers, the only differences
is instead of a return type, you put void.
Return keyword is not required here.
You need to be able to exit out of this so
you can see that it's still,
it's complaining about this, but
now it's gonna be complaining that there's
no return value in all code paths.
So that is that.
So in methods that return values,
the return statement is required.
You can return a statement.
You could actually also throw an
exception, but we'll get to that when we
talk about exception handling and
throwing exceptions.
Last thing I will mention about values or
functions that return or
methods that return values.
So we can declare multiple return
statements with branching logic depending,
and we'll talk about the different kinds
of branching logic as we get further in.
But if you declare a method called, say,
static so that anything can use it.
bool IsEven, an int number
you can have branching logic.
So I'm gonna show you a little
bit of arithmetic operators.
So this one's called modulus and
if you're a developer,
this will look very familiar, but it's
basically the remainder after you divide.
So if number modulus 2=0.
So if the remainder is 0,
it's an even number.
So you would return true, and
you notice that the method is complaining
that not all code paths return a value.
So because of that, because the it could
exit this method and still not have
a return value, we do need to return
false here, which is a good thing that's.
It's one of the things that I love
about somebody asked if C sharp
is strictly typed.
I love the fact that it has you
follow a very strict set of rules.
And this is one of those set of rules that
just prevent, as I like to say, foot guns.
It's not like that in the most
basic form of JavaScript,
but it is certainly like that in C Sharp.
Any questions about
methods before we move on?
>> Student 1: Just real quick, is
the standard within C-Sharp to use double
equal signs instead of triple equals?
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Good question.
There is no triple equals
inside of C-Sharp.
So double equals is one of those,
let's say what I say in
the JavaScript ecosystem is kind
of one of those dirty word.
[LAUGH] One of those things that you tend
not to use, but there's no triple equals.
There's no type coercion,
as it were that it doesn't have
the same semantics as it doesn't
JavaScript, great question.
So if you tried triple equals here, so
it doesn't do any sneaky type conversion
under the hood, there are some languages,
VB.NET, comes to mind that you
can turn off all of its safety.
You can turn off all of
its language safety and
have it coerce types when
you're doing comparisons.
That's not a thing in C sharp, though.
>> Mark: The static mean that you can use
the method without initializing the class.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: That is correct.
That's what static is for.
So static is really just a is basically
a helper method that doesn't rely on
any other things, any other variables
inside of your class if you've got.
And we'll talk about this
when we talk about classes.
We'll talk about instances of types and
objects.
When we get into that, it will kind of
come together more but essentially static
just means that you can access it
without having an instance of the type.
So you if you declared this math
class as something that you
can just instantiate, so
you could do var math = new Math.
And this is getting way ahead, so
we will cover this in more detail.
But you don't have to have an instance
of this class available in order to call
the AddNumbers function.
That's what it's intended to be,
kind of utility functions.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Yes.
>> Student 1: You mentioned earlier
that void only doesn't
necessarily need a return.
So I was just trying to think through
a case where those type of functions would
be used.
Would that also be used in creating like
utility and helper functions as well?
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Yeah, it could.
So if you wanted to, for
instance if you wanted to print a certain
message to a console in a certain shape or
log something there,
you had a utility function.
Let's say that you had a message that
you wanted to write to a database,
print a console, and
also log to some kind of logging system.
You might have a void returning method or
a void method or
just a straight method that does
all three of those things, but
doesn't necessarily return a value
because you don't need to in that case.
Does that make sense?
Good question.